---
title: about-me
layout: post
---

I am a problem solver who enjoys finding solutions to complex problems, often with limited resources.  I appreciate identifying the trade-offs between programmatic and technical solutions, and charting a course from the best solution today to the better solution tomorrow. I also enjoy building cross-functional engineering teams to solve these problems while building new skills in individuals. 

One of my favorite roles was as co-founder and CTO at Ecovent.  We built an engineering team from scratch including skills from plastic injection molding to embedded development.  I personally applied existing skills in thermodynamics and electrical engineering while learning new skills in mass production, radio protocol development, and more. We hired multiple interns to full-time positions and built their skillsets up.  Our alumni went on to found their own companies, work for FAANG companies, and more. During all fo this product development I also learned about fundraising, marketing, and more. 

Another is my current role as VP, Engineering at Soluna.  Leading an exceptionally thin team, we have developed a cutting edge Bitcoin mining data center, control system, and data analytics capability. An example of building what's needed now and upgrading it over time is the control system.  We initially utilized Node-Red to build the control system.  Node-Red provides an execptionally fast development environment with the caveats that it is flow based and it is built in Javascript. By appropriately developing around the strengths and weaknesses of Node-Red we were able to build a control system that is maintainable and able to switch off a site of 50MW in less than 5 minutes.  However, the shortcomings of Node-Red eventually built up.  Node-Red inherits the typing and performance issues of Javascript, as well as making testing and code reviews difficult. A new solution was needed in order to continue building. After a survey of existing technologies, I selected Elixir as our next tool for the control system.  Elixir is based on Erlang and OTP, and specializes in concurrency, communications, and reliability.  This is a perfect fit for a system that has to work all the time and has to communicate with and control thousands of devices concurrently.  Add to that Elixir's development toward a type system and treating testing as a first class citizen, and it becomes an even better solution. 

Transferring to an entirely new language and paradigm isn't possible overnight, so I developed a transition plan.  We would first offload data collection to Elixir.  This would give the team time to learn Elixir as well as build up a toolset for testing, developing, and deploying. We utilized a third party to kick off develpment and teach us some best practices. Then after deploying the data collection piece, we could better plan and develop the critical control portion of the system.  By carefully balancing technological risk with schedule and budget requirements, a solution can be found that best solves the problems at hand. 