---
title: The Interface Between Makers and Managers
layout: post
author: technickl
---
## Introduction
I've participated in and observed many different organizations over the 20+ years of my career.  I've seen good and bad implementations at both large and small scale.  In this post I will discuss the differences in managers and makers, as well as what I think is important about the interface between them. My hope is that by sharing my experience, more people will experience the good side of organizations than the bad side. 

## What is a manager?
One definition of manager is a person responsible for **controlling** or **administering** an organization.  In reality a manager often can't control much, but they are still **responsible** for the activities of their organization. This often means days full of meetings with individuals in the organization and individuals who interact with the organization.  These outside individuals include higher ranking managers, peers within the company who manage other groups, and individuals from organizations outside the company. 

Planning, communicating across organizations, budgeting, interviewing new candidates, being trained per company policy.  These are the activities of a manager.  Managers may have many titles, but the defining features is that they exist to facilitate creation, not to actually create. Often, the purpose of a manager is lost in the melee, and tends towards the more visible functions such as monitoring and reporting on the organization or actually performing some of the maker work themselves. However, effective managers find ways to focus on enabling their makers to operate at peak efficiency. Efficiency in this case means both that all effort is in the right direction and that results are generated with a minimum of waste.  

## What is a maker?
A maker, in the context of a company, is an individual whose responsibility is to create the *thing* that furthers the goals of the *company*.  Makers can be coders or software engineers whose output is a working software product.  Makers can be hardware engineers whose output is a drawing or an analysis of a device. Makers can also be the people who actually make the physical object! The defining feature of a maker is that their type of work requires deep thought and focus. Makers typically must keep a large context in mind as they bring together a swirl of concepts into a cohesive sum.  This state of focus is often called the *Flow State* or being *in the zone*.  The key to productivity of a maker is for them to be in the zone as often as possible, and to be working on the right thing when they are there.

Makers are often experts in their field, but nothing is created in a vacuum.  Makers require resources and direction to make the best use of their skills.  Makers can of course create these on their own, but makers often lack full context of the company as they can't spend all day in meetings gaining that context. Staying in the zone is often a contradictory requirement with gaining business context.

## Why must there be an interface?
An interface must exist between managers and makers because they both have something the other needs.  Managers (and the company) require the *thing* first and foremost. In addition to that, managers require information that the rest of the company requires for other operations.  This may be in the form of status on current tasks, required resources, or predicted performance of the *thing*.  This additional information gets back to that business context.  Every maker has some of this in their mind, the manager must collate and make sense of it all to feed back out to the organization. 

Makers require direction, boundaries, constraints, and resources.  Makers also require an environment conducive to making the *thing*. 

The interface is where these things are exchanged, and the problem is how to optimize this exchange such that the overall organization is best served. 

Often managers and makers appear to be at odds and fighting against each other.  Managers wanting more meetings, more reports, more metrics, and makers wanting quiet interrupted time and to just be left alone to work. This is a sign of a dysfunctional organization.  Managers and makers should have a clean interface where knowledge is transferred with a minimum of interruption. At this interface, makers get pointed in the right direction and managers gain an understanding of the current operational status of their organization. 

## Some ideas on how to create a great interface
### Get pointed in the right direction
The best thing a manager can bring to the makers they are responsible for is direction. Without direction, a maker's time and effort could be completely wasted no matter how efficiently the work is performed. Direction can come in many forms, and the exact shape of the direction depends on the situation at hand.  One example of great direction would be a detailed specification that describes all of the behaviors of the *thing*. Another might be a prioritization of schedule vs. cost vs. quality that the maker can use to make decisions.  Another could be a list of accomplishments the maker should aim for in order to reach their goals.
#### Detail
What these types of direction have in common is that they must be in a clear and understandable format with as little ambiguity as possible. There needs to be room for creativity and for solving the problem in the best way possible of course, but what there shouldn't be are questions the maker has to come back to get the answer to. That's where the maker needs to meet the interface, and push for more detail when necessary before diving into the zone to build the thing. Sufficient detail in the description prevents both wasted effort in the wrong direction and inefficiency due to repeated starts and stops to request more clarification.
#### Language
The language used in directions should be simple and unambiguous.  For example, jargon may not translate across the interface well.  Makers spend their time in a very domain specific world, while managers are typically in an entirely different one.  Some of the traditional management jargon tends to reinforce the stereotypes of useless managers propped up by the makers, and tech specific jargon and tend to hide complexity from managers who aren't as familiar with the space. Organization specific jargon can also make it difficult to onboard new members anywhere on the team.
Another issue is language that can be seen as demeaning or dismissive.  Either side using the word *just* is a bad idea.  Using *just* implies that the speaker has already made the assumption that the work/complexity/risk is insignificant which preemptively cuts off the other side of the interface from adding their input. The language used across the interface should be well defined, intentional, and clear.  Consistency of language helps improve the efficiency of communication as well. 

### Efficient work
Efficient work for an organization mostly means that the makers are working efficiently because they are the bulk of the organization and are the ones who are making the *thing* that the organization needs.  This means managers should strive to create an environment that allows for efficient maker work.
#### Space
One dimension to this is the physical space in which the work is completed.  Contrary to many modern startups, open office space is not conducive to deep work.  Often in these types of environments you'll find makeshift fixes such as the makers coming in at off hours,sound booths being installed, more remote work, or just miserable makers. A manager can communicate with their team to discover if this is an issue and push the organization for change.  
#### Time
Another dimension of efficient work is time.  [As Paul Graham puts it](http://paulgraham.com/makersschedule.html), there is a maker's schedule and a manager's schedule. A manager can help their makers be efficient by not destroying their maker schedule.  If the team can get away with one meeting a week, that's what should be implemented.  If there must be multiple meetings they should be grouped together, ideally in the second half of the day.  The grouping reduces adding time that's useless for accomplishing deep work between the meetings, and being in the afternoon leaves the clarity and freshness of the mind in the morning for making.  In order for this minimalist approach to work though, the communication during the limited meetings must be effective and unambiguous.
Office hours are one way to maintain communications while not forcing a maker to break their flow.  The manager's schedule is already a bunch of chunks, but office hours allow the makers to pick a time that has the least impact on their work to communicate with their manager.  This setup is effective for asynchronous meetings like 1:1's or discussing requests. 
#### Predictability
Predictability allows both managers and makers to focus on the now without worrying about what might happen. A maker knowing they have four good hours in the morning to work on a known task let's them stay focused on that task until it's complete without worrying about what's happening anywhere else in the organization. Predictability also allows the manager to make predictions about when tasks will be complete or how much something will cost.  In order to achieve predictability, effort must be made to keep asynchronous events away from the synchronous work.  An example would be a bug ticket flow that doesn't involve any makers until the regularly schedule planning meeting.  Having random users directly contact makers at any time in the day is a great way to distract them from the task at hand.  This reduces efficiency of getting the planned task done, and can mask the effects of bugs from future planning efforts.


### Looking in the Mirror
This final subject straddles what makes a manager vs. what makes a leader.  The manager is often by default the person who interacts with everyone on the team, and who speaks the most when the team is assembled.  This means that the manager by default becomes the culture maker.  Multiple times in my career I've seen organizations and companies become reflections of their leaders.  Sometimes this is for the best, and brings optimism, enthusiasm, and self reflection.  However, sometimes leaders unintentionally spread their bad habits to the organization.  Insecurity, disorganization, distraction, and prejudice. Managers must be aware of their influence on the organization and strive to create a culture that properly addresses the needs of the organization.
Makers aren't off the hook in this area though.  They should call out bad habits of their managers, and be good examples in the groups they are in as cultural influence is somewhat recursive in that each team member has their own impacts.  Managers, and all team members, should take constructive feedback seriously and work to improve.  With understanding and trust, the organization can grow in effectiveness over time.

## In the End
The Beatles had it right, "the love you take is equal to the love you make." If both sides of the organization operate in good faith and show a willingness to improve, then the culture stands a good chance of being healthy and the organization of being successful. 